Today inshallah we're going to focus on how to deal with and what does it mean?
I want to talk to you about uh how to to navigate through it and how
to really face it and and then we're going to talk about patience and perseverance
and and and inshallah we're learning through how to take care of ourselves in calamities and times of hardship as we
all go through. So let's go through it inshallah.
In Islam, there is a sixth pillar that every Muslim must believe in. It is called to believe in
it's good and it's bad. What is and what does it mean good and bad?
Sometimes the word in the Quran appears in a different word. Sometimes it appears as and sometimes both of these words are the same thing.
They're both synonymous. They go hand in hand together. But for those who want to become technical to know the difference
between and is the following is
literally means a final order a final decision a fixed in advance.
It's usually when a judge makes a judgment and it's final. In Islam it means something that has been decided and ordered by Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
for all his creations. whether it is in terms of its creation, destruction or
changes. Then we go to the word — ad means pre-measurement or set to a
certain amount and executed like rolled out, made to exist. Islamically, it is something that has been measured and set
at a certain amount since the beginning of time so that it follows Allah's knowledge which comes before everything.
So is what will be and is how it will be in a very simple sentence. Just take this sentence.
You can say — and is the belief, the Muslim belief, that everything that
happens is pre-measured and predetermined by Allah and only Allah.
Before he created creation — based on his infinite knowledge, his will, his power, his wisdom, his justice, and his mercy.
So here are some other definitions. It's fate and destiny that is all from Allah.
Fate and destiny is all determined and measured by Allah. Everything that happens is by Allah's will. Everything has been predetermined. Allah created
everything, decided everything about everything and determined its destiny.
Everything that will ever be is written, willed, created, and known by Allah perfectly. Nothing happens without his will. And all of this happened
50,000 years before Allah created creation. That's in the authentic hadith. And there are many verses in the
Quran that talk about this. For example, Allah says in surah Al-Qamar: everything we have created in a precise measure and pre-ordainment.
Allah says in the Quran: everything we have created in a precise measure and pre-ordainment.
And our command and matter is only but like the blink of an eye — meaning the end of time. When the end of time comes it is like the blink of an eye.
It also means that whatever Allah wants to create or to happen, he only says "Be" and it is. We see another verse in the
Quran talking about predestination — Allah's decision. When he talks about the story of Jesus son of Mary, when he
was born of a miraculous birth, the Christians later on said that he has a father who is God — he's a son of God.
They said it was Joseph the carpenter who
either married Maryam or — God forbid — they say something else. But Allah answers them by
saying — Allah says: That is Jesus son of Mary in truthful fact.
[Music]
[Laughter]
Very easy and very simple. Allah says: that is Jesus son of Mary in truthful fact.
It is not befitting nor is it possible for Allah to beget a son. Far away is he from any imperfection.
When he decrees and decides a matter, he merely says "Be" and it is. What does it mean? It means that Isa was born without a father.
People were very astonished — how? So Allah replies: he just says "Be" and it is.
Had he been born a normal birth, nobody would be shocked or astonished. Allah wouldn't have to say "Be". It would be like everyone else. So it was a miracle.
So brothers and sisters, Allah decrees everything and says "Be" and it is. This is called Qadr — and once it's done, nothing can change it.
And predestination — fate, destiny, Allah's will — nothing happens without Allah's will. Qadr is good and
bad. What does it mean that there is good and bad?
First and foremost, brothers and sisters, we never attribute to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala anything bad.
Nothing bad comes from Allah. And you might say: then how is fate and destiny
good and bad? Yes. Bad is divided into two branches.
This is in the Quran and it's also in the sunnah. The first branch is bad things that have no benefit or wisdom
whatsoever — they're just plain evil. And there is no evil that comes from Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala. No matter what you see in life, anything that looks bad to
you, don't ever say that Allah decrees evil things. Evil only comes from people, not from Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala. So what is the bad that comes from Allah? They are the ones that are mixed with a wisdom that comes out of
them. Allah created the good and he created the bad. The bad he created only because from the bad there comes good.
Without some bad, there will be no good.
And I'll give you an example — a scenario.
A doctor, a surgeon who you trust.
If you took your child who has got a severe problem that requires surgery
and you saw that surgeon cut your child open and you see all that blood coming
out and the bones being cut and organs being replaced and stitching it up, giving painkillers, going through months of agony —
Will you still be grateful to that doctor or will you abuse the doctor?
You'd be grateful — to Allah first, then to the doctor. Thank you doctor for helping, because my son is going to heal inshallah.
But was there pain? Was there ugliness?
Was there some things that we see from our eyes as humans as bad?
Allah created pain. He created some things that to us look bad but from
them comes good. So when Allah says to believe in Qadr — that Allah pre-measures everything to happen whether it's good
or bad — it means that the bad is also good, but sometimes bad is a necessity. Do you understand?
Let's give another example. I always use this. When you learn how to walk as a baby,
do you walk immediately without any pain, or do you have to fall sometimes? Some babies if you're not careful might get injured,
but they're learning eventually how to walk.
You would rather them fall a hundred times to eventually learn how to walk than not be able to walk all their life.
Nobody's going to focus on the minor harm. And by the way, anything that looks bad that Allah has decreed is
always temporary. It never stays for long. That's why Allah says in the Quran —
he repeats it twice — so that we can drill it in our heads: As a matter of fact, with hardship is always ease. As a matter of fact, with hardship is always ease.
Meaning the hardship which Allah allows to happen, there is always ease and goodness that's going to come out of it.
What is your duty? Your duty is to assume of Allah your Lord positively.
When does evil come out? When you start to assume of your Lord negatively. Who created evil? You — by that assumption. That's when you live
in agony. Allah says in the Quran —
[Applause]
Allah describes certain people that when they're faced with calamities, they face it with negativity. They assume of Allah bad, and they give up and they turn away
from Allah. Allah says: there are people in the world who — when
good comes their way — they're relaxed and satisfied. They stay where they are, relaxed, thinking "I'm all good." And when a calamity or something negative happens to them, they turn flat on their faces — meaning they turn against the world, they
blame everybody, they have fights with everyone, they blame Allah. Allah says: some of them worship Allah
their whole lives as if a person is walking on the edge of a cliff. Have you ever seen anyone walking on the edge of a cliff —
maybe on social media? — they're in danger. But the meaning of this verse is: when somebody's walking on the edge of a cliff, it means you're just on the edge.
Meaning a little wind or breeze may make you fall. So Allah says there are some people who follow their religion just on the edge — they do the absolute
minimum — and any tiny little negative thing that happens in their life, immediately they lose the plot. Allah says there are people who worship Allah
like that — not really fully into it — and then when a calamity befalls them they fall on their faces like a person walking on the edge of a cliff.
This is the person who loses both the goodness in this world and the goodness of the hereafter. When we all understand that we are created in this world for a
test, you will understand that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala told us this a long time ago — for those who read the Quran.
It's even in the Bible and the Torah that they also received.
Everyone — let's have a look at what Allah said and what he told us about this life.
It is in Al-Baqarah and
other surahs like it. You all know the story of when Allah created Adam and told the angels to bow
to Adam. Let's analyze it for a second.
In chapter 2:30, Allah says: "Just think —
when your Lord said to the angels: Lo, I am about to place a viceregent
on earth." The angels said: "Oh Allah, will you place on it one who will spread mischief and shed blood
while we celebrate your glory and extol your holiness?" He said: "Surely I know what you do not know."
I don't know if people read that verse and think deeply about it — because in this is the answer to everything in our life. Listen carefully.
First of all — Malak. Angel in the Arabic language means message-bearer.
Malak, plural Malaikah — message bearers — which means that angels are not abstract
depersonalized beings. They have a personality. They have a life.
They are not just forces that fly around. They are beings with a personality of their own and
they are employed by Allah subhana wa ta'ala for the administration of his universe. They are his faithful servants. So they have a personality and
they can choose to obey or disobey — contrary to what some people say, that angels have no free will. Actually
they do have free will. Angels have free will but what they don't have is desires and temptations.
They don't have those desires that humans have. It's the
desires that make us go astray — and that is why they are obedient and they choose to obey Allah. So he said: I am placing a
viceregent on earth. A viceregent is a deputy —
a person who acts in the place of a ruler or a governor or a sovereign.
Who is that person whom Allah is going to place on earth as a deputy — a person who acts in the place of a ruler? The ruler is Allah.
Who is he placing? You and me — as what?
We are the deputies, the ones who act under the rule of Allah, on behalf of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala. We have
certain duties and powers in this life.
That's why Allah said in the Quran: we have certainly honored the children of Adam.
Allah honored us — and that is why Allah said to the angels: bow to Adam.
Now they said to him — not opposing him, they just asked: what's the wisdom behind making a new creation on earth — a viceregent, someone who's a deputy of you on earth?
I mean, if you're after glorifying you and everything to be pure — here we are. We're already pure, our Lord. We
pray to you. We glorify your name. We're pure. You don't see us shedding blood. You don't see us
doing corruption. If that's what you want, our Lord — I'm just paraphrasing what the angels mean — we're here. We're already doing that.
Why would there need to be someone else?
Where's the gap? Are we missing something? Have we done something wrong?
If you realize, brothers and sisters, the angels lacked knowledge about what Allah subhana wa ta'ala knows.
They thought that Allah wants people to always worship him and be absolutely pure with no problems.
But they misunderstood. Who is Allah? I'll give you an example.
Among Allah's names and attributes is Al-Adl — the Just.
How is Allah subhana wa ta'ala going to manifest this attribute of his without having
vices — good and bad — and justice? Allah is the Merciful. Mercy is applied when
somebody deserves to be punished. How is mercy going to be manifested in the world? Allah is the
Creator. How is he the Creator when he's not creating? So it's far beyond our minds. But Allah subhana wa ta'ala —
he created these people — us — with free will, with desires, with temptations, with
ability and knowledge that the angels don't have. Allah honored us in this way. Angels, because of their
lack of desire, didn't really understand free will. What does it mean to have free will? It means they didn't understand it because they didn't have
desires and temptations. When you have desires and temptations, they pull you towards the wrong — so now you have to make decisions. Do you
understand? Without desires and temptations, decisions are easy — you already know where you're going naturally. But when you have a vice
that's pulling you, you have to make a decision against it. And this is where your rank rises — this is how you get closer to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
The person who's already naturally inclined to good — and the person who has a choice between tough times,
challenging times and easy times, and chooses to face the challenges and rise — the second is greater to Allah.
A person who struggles and strives against odds to please Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala while they go through pain is higher in the eyes of Allah. And all of
us are like that inshallah. It's up to our choice. It's only a short time then we return back to Allah — no more challenges, no more tests.
So from the beginning Allah said: I am creating those who will represent my laws in this earth on behalf of me.
In other words, that's what Allah is saying. So this world is not a paradise for us.
Allah is saying: you have to work in it.
You have to defend each other, protect each other, uphold the justice. Don't wait for me to bring down the angels to
you. You are representatives. So go and uphold it — strive and struggle —
and I will be with you, watching over you all the way. And nothing will go in vain.
Whether it's death, whether it's sickness, whether it's hardship, whether it's loss of wealth, loss of lives, loss of
anything. The Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam told us in a hadith in Muslim: there is nothing that a Muslim receives — whether it be worry,
anxiety, fear, hurt from someone's hurtful words, or anything like that — even the prick of
a needle — except that Allah compensates that person by forgiving their past sins
and raising their ranks. Nothing goes in vain, brothers and sisters. And when someone can put that in their mind, suddenly life
becomes so sweet. I'll give you an example.
Let's say that you had a business opportunity and you were going to make a lot of money — that's what you thought.
And then the opportunity passed you and you said: "Oh no, another person took it. They made millions. I could have
made millions." Allah replies to you in the Quran: It is so that
you do not despair over what passed you, and do not boast and go overboard
over the blessings that came your way. For Allah does not like every boaster or arrogant,
ungrateful person. So Qadr comes and tells you: listen, if it passed you — alhamdulillah — this
was what Allah had written for you. If you got it — say alhamdulillah and don't boast. Just be normal. For you are in a
test in this life. Everybody's going to leave everything behind anyway — except their good deeds and bad deeds — those they'll take with them.
Now the story of the angels: Allah taught Adam the names of everything. Gave him knowledge. And then
he said to the angels: "Tell me the names of all these things." Now there are angels that know everything about climate, angels that
know about gravity, angels about fire, angels about water. Each one's got their position, but their knowledge is only in their expertise. Now Allah taught Adam the
names of everything. So he became an all-rounder. Allah says to the angels: "Tell me the names of all these things
collectively." Angels individually didn't know. But
Adam was able to say them collectively — which means that Allah created the human being to have an intellect to learn. And through knowledge you become a deputy. You represent Allah's rule on
earth. But you need resources. You need help. You need knowledge. The angels were dedicated to one or two things. The human beings have many
tasks. When you have many tasks, you are more important. That's why you honor people who have a more responsible job. That's how you rise.
A person who just worries about what makes them happy in life without contributing — they're not important. They become a burden on community and society.
Not important. So that's how Allah made us. And when the angels said: "Oh our Lord, glory to you. We have no
knowledge except what you gave us." Allah then replied to them.
He said to Adam: "Tell them all the names." And then he said to the angels: "Didn't I tell you that I know that which you do
not know, oh angels?" What's Allah telling them? Remember the question they asked: oh our Lord, would you place on earth one who would shed blood and
spread corruption while we glorify you already? So Allah says: I know that which you do not know. Meaning — I know in
this creation and the reason why I have created them. And I do know that there will be some shedding of blood and corruption. Yet there are things that
you, oh angels, can never conceive or comprehend even if I told you. I know that which you do not know. So the
angels then accepted it wholeheartedly and said: "Our Lord, we only know what you taught us. We submit — and we'll even make dua for your creatures."
And the angels do make dua for us. It's in the Quran.
They seek forgiveness for those who are on earth.
So brothers and sisters — why did I say this story?
Because you know how the angels didn't know everything. They jumped to conclusions. The angels jumped to a conclusion and they thought that Allah
wanted this — but Allah told them: "No, no, no. There's a lot you don't know about. And if I told you, you're not going to get it. So how about you just take me as your Lord —
be angels as you are and worship me and just trust me." They said: "Of course — forever." What does it mean
to us as humans? It means the same thing, brothers and sisters.
Things that happen in our life — whether they look good or look bad. Number one: don't assume you know what Allah wants. You
don't know. Number two: assume of Allah positively — that there is something good coming out of it. Assume that Allah has a plan for you, a forgiveness from
you. And if it happens and you don't understand why — persevere through it and know that Allah will not let anything go in vain. He will reward you
or forgive you and it will all be counted for you as an investment for your hereafter. To the point where the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam said in one authentic hadith: on the
Day of Judgment, there will be people who will look at other people who had gone through so much struggle and pain in this world. And they themselves
had not gone through the same torture. And when they see what rank Allah has given those who suffered — the amount of rewards and pleasure that Allah has
given them because of their patience and perseverance with calamities — the people who had lived in luxury will say: we wish we could go back to earth so that we
could be cut into pieces — so that we
could be successful as these people are successful. But see — on the Day of Judgment that becomes a privilege.
Here it looks terrible and horrific. And nobody should go through it. But Allah knows who would have passed it and who would not. And
so Allah doesn't give everybody the same tests and trials. Some people go through mental trials — some psychological, some emotional. Some go through
relationship breakups. Some go through money problems, food problems, loss of lives, sickness, death, losses
of some other sort — losing your job, problems in your life.
Sometimes it's because of yourself as well. But then Allah says to you: okay, you still have a chance. Get out of it.
Fix yourself and the road can come back.
So brothers and sisters, this life is built on tests and trials and calamities. Allah never promised you a paradise here. This is not it.
This is not it. Until you get that out of your head, you won't find the peace and contentment you're looking for.
One person said to me: "Imagine that you're on the Day of Judgment watching yourself in a live movie — and you are the hero of that movie. The big star —
watching yourself wake up from bed, going to sleep, praying fajr or missing it, going
here, going there, going to school, going to work, coming back, meeting with your parents, cousins, relatives, spouse, children — going to work,
earning your money, eating, drinking, spending time with friends, in your car, what you're listening to. Imagine you're watching yourself every single second.
And then he said to me: if you're looking at yourself and you see you doing something good — like praying — and you finish and you say alhamdulillah — and you
want yourself to keep going because you see your rank rising — and then suddenly you see yourself get up quickly and just start doing other things. What
would you want to do? If you're looking at yourself like that, you'd say: oh my God, look — there was somebody in need. You could have given charity. Just take your phone and give a
charity. Or maybe over there — your mother needed some help, or your father — go and help them. Or that person you're upset with — you could have said: hey, let's
make it up. The idea is: you will look back at yourself and say — I wish I could go back so that I could give
more in charity and good deeds and change the fate of my eternity. So a Muslim lives their life with the
hereafter in mind. Brothers and sisters — with Qadr — let's investigate very quickly the story in the Quran:
Musa, alayhis salam, went — and Allah said to him: there is a man
whom we have given knowledge more than you.
We have given this particular man knowledge from us — meaning it is not natural knowledge.
It's not your common knowledge that fits with the laws of this world. We have given him some special
knowledge which we didn't give to other people. So Musa alayhis salam said: "Oh my Lord, show me where he is so I may go and learn from him." Allah told him where to
find him. Cutting the story short — he went with his apprentice and found the man. It is said that his name was Al-Khodr. And he said to him:
"Would you allow me to follow you so that you may teach me of what you have been taught of guidance and goodness?"
The man did not hesitate and immediately shot back with a reply.
He said: "You will not be able to be patient with me." He did not ask him his name. He didn't even say salam. Just: "Can I follow
you?" The man looks at him and says: "You can't be patient." Musa got shocked and said:
"You will find me, if Allah wills, very patient and persevering, and I won't disobey you in anything." He said:
"Okay. If you're going to follow me, then don't ask me about a
single thing that I do — until I decide to tell you." Just like that — straight to business. He said: "Very well."
They entered — they were going to cross the sea and they found two brothers from a poor family
who had a boat which they used for their business — going from land to land. They said: "Can
you give us a lift to the next land?" So they gave him a lift, were very kind to them — gave them food, shelter, water. And they gave them a room at the bottom of the deck.
When they went underneath, Al-Khodr took an axe and started to break and ruin the core of the ship.
Musa alayhis salam immediately jumped and said: "How could you wreck their ship when they did so much good for us?" And Al-Khodr immediately said
to him: "Didn't I tell you, you will not be able to be patient with me?" And Musa remembered — it hadn't been even a day.
He remembered immediately and said: "Please don't hold me
accountable for what I forgot. Don't lecture me. Just let me go — I understood my lesson."
So they went until they reached a young boy — maybe 9, 10 years old. Al-Khodr comes
up to him and kills him. Musa explodes:
"Have you killed a soul unjustly? You've done something terribly outrageous."
Al-Khodr said: "Didn't I say you will not be patient with me?" And Musa was also getting impatient with Al-Khodr's impatience response.
Musa said: if
I ask you about anything after now, you can kick me out. I've got no more excuses. They went — they entered into a little
town and the townspeople were horrible to them. They abused them, swore at them, spat at them, gave them no food. They were
very tired — it was a norm to give travellers food — and they kicked them out. On their way out they saw a
wall that was being built — part of a building.
So Al-Khodr goes and starts helping these evil people to construct the wall.
Musa, after they finish helping, says: you know, you could have taken some
money or food off them just for the help. He said: that's it — we depart from here.
You have finished all your excuses. Musa said: okay, that's it — I wasn't patient enough.
So Al-Khodr said: but I will tell you the meanings of these three things before you go.
As for the ship — that belonged to the poor people who worked on the sea. They were good people. But on their route
which they have to travel, there is a king that was replacing another king and he was very evil — he was
taking every ship that looked good from families. So I wanted to make it look damaged so the king would leave them alone and they could continue on their journey.
As for the boy — he was going to grow up and be a tyrant, an evil person to his parents. And his parents are good righteous people — his mother and
father. So your Lord wanted to replace that child with a better child for them — one who would grow up to be righteous. Now Allah does not force
people to be righteous, brothers and sisters. He knows what you're going to become. He doesn't make you do things.
Some people come to me and say: "Sheikh, ask Allah to guide me to pray, ask Allah to guide me to wear the
hijab, ask Allah to guide me so I may be able to fast." I say: that's not really the right dua.
Guidance means that Allah lets you see what's
right from wrong. The rest is up to you — you have to follow or not. Allah doesn't put a holy spirit in you.
That's what some people believe — that some spirit goes inside of you and suddenly you're enlightened. Doesn't happen that way.
You are all alhamdulillah already enlightened. It's
like giving someone a map when they're lost and saying: take this map and go in that direction. If you keep following that map, you will get there. But if you don't trust
the one who gave it — or you say "nah, stuff it" — you're going to get lost. Allah gave us the map.
That's called hidayah. Hidayah is not some spirit that comes into you.
The sky will not open up for you. The Quran is with you — you've already been guided. So Allah does not force people
to repent. He does not force people to become religious. He doesn't force people to do the right thing. He already gave you the ability — just as you can do the
wrong thing. So Allah does not make you do the wrong thing. Allah tells us then: he replaced that child for Allah
to give better in its place — and all four of them end up in paradise. As for the wall — I helped them build it.
Truly they were evil — but that wall belonged to two orphans. And those orphans' seventh great-grandfather was a righteous man. So Allah wanted to look after his generation — all the way
down — so long as they are righteous. Which means: if you're righteous and your children are righteous, Allah will keep looking after your progeny till the hundredth generation. Subhan Allah. He said: underneath
that wall there was a treasure. And those evil people were about to find it — if they saw it, they were going to take it off the orphans. And the orphans would not be able to use their treasure to look after themselves.
So Allah wanted them to grow up — when they're strong enough so that they can take their own treasure out. He said: I had to
help them — and I didn't want to say anything to those people. And then he says: I did not do this out of my own
decision. Allah told me to do it. So we don't go ahead, brothers and sisters, and start doing things on this basis.
Allah told him to do it. But the moral of the story, brothers and sisters, is: Allah is giving us an example using one of the greatest prophets and
messengers in the world — Musa, alayhis salam. The one whom Allah spoke to at Mount Sinai. The receiver of the Torah. One of the five greatest prophets in
Islam. Allah showed us that even he — in the time of really strong
calamities and tests — was not successful. He could not be patient enough. So Allah gives everyone tests at their
level. In other words — had Musa known why Al-Khodr was doing what he did, he
would have been okay with it. But Allah is testing our patience — not giving us the answers. Because it is in your
perseverance where your level rises. Can you imagine all the teachers giving you the answers to your exam? You become
a doctor — you're going to hurt people.
A person studying to be a scholar — if you cheat and get all the answers, you'll misguide people. You get your license as
a builder — next minute everyone's under the rubble.
Do you understand? And same with Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala. Until we understand this brothers and sisters, we are not going to be able to face
calamities with perseverance and patience.
Finally, Allah says in the Quran —
[Music]
We will surely try you and test you and put you through calamities.
A little bit of fear — sometimes you're going to be afraid.
You're going to be hungry. Sometimes you're going to lose some wealth.
Sometimes you're going to lose loved ones. Death. And sometimes you lose luxuries and opportunities.
Allah says: give the best news to those who persevere and are patient. The ones who when a calamity befalls them, they
immediately say: to Allah we belong and to him we are going to return. The ayah continues: these are the
people whom no harm or fear is going to be upon them on the Day of Judgment, and the angels will pray for them. Brothers
and sisters — patience is an act of worship which many people have forgotten.
It's called Sabr — taken from the prickly pear tree.
Have you seen the prickly pear?
Prickly pear. It's a nasty tree — it's got so many prickles on it. And to be able to get through all the prickles and the sharpened thorns —
guess what you get out of it? A sweet, tasty fruit of different colors.
But you have to get through the thorns.
You've got to be patient and careful and persevere — and then you'll get to the sweetness. Imagine life like that prickly pear. You need to get through
the thorns and eventually you'll get to the sweetness inshallah. And I finish by saying: patience has three types.
Not one — three. The highest one. The first type of patience we need is
patience in worship and fulfilling the commands of Allah. That is the first and highest — because that requires patience.
Musa alayhis salam had to be patient. We have to be patient with our salah, with our fasting, with our values, with
our morals, with our emotions, with our anger, with our mouths, with our hands, with our treatment of others, with our money. We all have to be
patient. That is the highest rank — to be patient and persevere in the commands of Allah. As Allah says:
worship your Lord until death comes to you.
Command your family and teach them salah — and be patient with worship. The second level of patience is the opposite: to
persevere and be patient and work hard and wrestle against doing sins —
especially major sins. If minor sins just come by — so long as you do good deeds, it'll wipe them away. But don't insist on continuing with sins.
So strive against sins as much as you can. Fight with them and wrestle — sins in your actions, sins in your
words, sins in your eyes, sins in your ears, sins in your earning and spending, sins in your relationships. Strive to your best. And
the way to strive is: if you fall, you repent. I'm going to repent. I'm going to try again. Repent, try again.
But never ever give up. Patience against sins means you don't give up. You don't say: "I've missed so many prayers.
I've done so many haram things. I used to do drugs. I've been a really bad person. I've got bad relationships. I've lost my family. I am a loser —
I'm going to hellfire. Forget it." That is the shaytan telling you: "Don't come back to Allah." And Allah calls you
again and again in the Quran: "Oh you who have burdened yourselves —
thinking you have no more return because of your sins and
bad deeds — do not give up from the mercy and forgiveness of Allah. Allah forgives all sins." So that's the second type of patience. And the last one —
everybody knows this one. And that's what most people go through. It is when tragedies and
calamities come your way. Any kind of tragedy, any kind of calamity — whatever it may be.
What do you do with this patience? You hold yourself together.
It doesn't mean you're not going to go through pain. It doesn't mean it's going to be easy. No — hold yourself together until you get past it.
What does it mean to hold yourself together? It means: don't resort to immoral acts or give up on Allah. Hold yourself
together. Hold in there. Even if you do not understand it — even if you cannot find closure — even if you cannot find a
solution — hold in there. Do what you can. Ask Allah. Make dua. Keep going. Seek help. Get medical help if
you need it. Use all the resources that you have — and don't give up and say "I am in ruins. I'm gone."
Keep going. May Allah bless you, my brothers and sisters. It's now time for salah. Next week inshallah we'll continue.
I'm not sure what the topic is, but I hope inshallah tonight we learned something beneficial. May Allah bless
you and reward you. And lastly, we'll make a dua.
For Palestine — oh Allah, give victory to our brothers in Palestine and change their state from fear to security, from hardship to ease. Oh Allah, protect
them. Oh Allah, bless them. Oh Allah, relieve them from their hardship. Oh Allah, open the road to goodness for all of them. Oh Allah, return their rights
to them and their property and their lands. Oh Allah, return the Muslims to your deen.
Oh Allah, forgive us for our shortcomings and accept our dua.